README.md, before:

# Deterministic YAML

A **deterministic, LLM-friendly subset of YAML** that remains **100% valid YAML**, while eliminating ambiguity, output variance, and syntax hazards.  

**Deterministic YAML makes human intervention visible** through `$human$` fields—the golden seams that show where human judgment intervened. Every repair, every insight, becomes visible evidence of human contribution.

Deterministic YAML provides a canonical, predictable serialization format ideal for structured data generation and configuration, with **Kintsukuroi for data**—making human contribution visible and permanent.

---

## 💭 Fundamental Philosophy: Kintsukuroi for Data

**The pottery was always going to break. The question is whether we hide the cracks or fill them with gold.**

Deterministic YAML applies the 500-year-old Japanese art of **Kintsukuroi** (金継ぎ) to configuration files. In Kintsukuroi, broken pottery is repaired with gold, making the repairs visible and beautiful rather than hidden. The mended object is more valuable for having been broken.

### Making Human Intervention Visible

**Traditional approach:**
- Bug appears → fix it → pretend it never happened
- Comment lost → regenerate without it → no trace it existed
- Hallucination occurs → correct it silently → history erased

**Kintsukuroi approach:**
- Bug appears → fix it → mark where it was broken
- Comment lost → preserve it as `$human$` → make the human insight visible
- Hallucination occurs → recognize it → turn the crack into gold

### `$human$` as Golden Seams

Traditional YAML comments (`#`) are treated as fragile metadata that gets lost, ignored, or rewritten unpredictably. Deterministic YAML treats comments as **first-class data** through `$human$` key-value pairs—the golden seams that show where human judgment intervened.

Every `$human$` field is visible evidence of human contribution. When an LLM regenerates config:
- **Without `$human$`**: Silent drift, invisible degradation
- **With `$human$`**: The human touchpoints remain visible, like gold in the cracks

**The `$human$` field isn't just documentation—it's the golden seam that shows where human judgment intervened. It makes repairs visible, not invisible.**

### Kintsukuroi Principles Applied

**Kintsukuroi principles:**
- Breakage and repair are part of the object's history
- Visibility of repairs adds value
- The mended object is more beautiful for having been broken

**Deterministic YAML with `$human$`:**
- Changes and human intervention are part of the config's history
- Visibility of human reasoning adds value
- The configuration is more reliable for explicitly showing where humans made decisions

**Comments matter — enough that they need to be handled deterministically, not thrown away.**

When you normalize YAML with comments, they are automatically converted to `$human$` fields (which always appear first in each object), ensuring your documentation and insights remain part of the data structure. Every repair, every human insight, becomes a visible golden seam in the artifact.

---

## 🚀 Why Deterministic YAML?

Standard YAML is flexible but inconsistent:

- Multiple quoting styles  
- Block vs flow syntax  
- Anchors & aliases  
- Comments (lost during processing)  
- Literal & folded blocks  
- Implicit typing  
- Whitespace sensitivity  
- Ambiguous scalars  
- Inconsistent number formats  

All of these introduce branching points that increase **LLM decoding entropy**, making outputs unpredictable. More critically, **human insight gets lost**—comments vanish, context disappears, and the history of human judgment is erased.

JSON solves some variance issues but wastes tokens, is less human-friendly, and still loses comments.

**Deterministic YAML** hits the middle ground: predictable like JSON, compact and readable like YAML, and **makes human intervention visible** through `$human$` fields.

**This isn't just about preventing errors—it's about making human contribution visible and permanent**, even (especially) in a world where AI regenerates everything.

---

## ✅ Features

- Fully valid YAML 1.2  
- **Deterministic, canonical subset**
  - Unquoted keys  
  - Unquoted strings unless required  
  - Double-quoted strings with minimal escaping  
  - Lowercase booleans (`true`, `false`)  
  - Canonical `null`  
  - Canonical integers & floats  
  - No comments, no anchors, no flow style  
  - No multi-line scalars (`\n` escapes only)  
  - Mandatory 2-space indentation  
  - Mandatory lexicographic key ordering  
  - Canonical empty collections: `[]` and `{}`  
- Low variance for LLM output (~70–90% reduction vs standard YAML)  
- Token-efficient (~20–30% fewer tokens than JSON)  
- Easy to generate and validate

---

## 📦 Included Tools

- **GBNF grammar** for Deterministic YAML  
- **Python library** (`DeterministicYAML`) for canonical serialization  
- **Validator** to ensure conformance  
- **Canonicalizer** to normalize arbitrary YAML  
- **Examples & tests** demonstrating deterministic output

---

## 💻 Usage

### Basic Usage

```python
from lib.deterministic_yaml import DeterministicYAML

# Convert Python data to Deterministic YAML
data = {
    'name': 'John',
    'age': 30,
    'active': True,
    'tags': ['dev', 'ops'],
    'config': {
        'host': 'localhost',
        'port': 5432
    }
}

yaml_str = DeterministicYAML.to_deterministic_yaml(data)
print(yaml_str)
```

**Output:**
```yaml
active: true
age: 30
config:
  host: localhost
  port: 5432
name: John
tags:
  - dev
  - ops
```

Note: Keys are automatically sorted lexicographically (notice `active` comes before `age` before `name`).

### Validate YAML

```python
# Check if YAML conforms to Deterministic YAML spec
yaml_text = """
name: John
age: 30
active: true
"""

is_valid, error = DeterministicYAML.validate(yaml_text)
if is_valid:
    print("✓ Valid Deterministic YAML")
else:
    print(f"✗ Invalid: {error}")
```

### Normalize Existing YAML

```python
# Convert any YAML to Deterministic YAML format
standard_yaml = """
# This is a comment
name: "John"  # Quoted string
age: 30
tags: [dev, ops]  # Flow style
"""

deterministic_yaml = DeterministicYAML.normalize(standard_yaml)
print(deterministic_yaml)
```

**Output:**
```yaml
$human$: "name: User's name"
age: 30
name: John
tags:
  - dev
  - ops
```

**Note**: Comments are preserved as `$human$` fields (not discarded), which always appear first in each object—the golden seams that make human insight visible. Quotes removed (when safe), flow style converted to block style.

### Example: Making Repairs Visible

```yaml
# Input with a correction note
service:
  $human$: "Originally had typo 'retries: 3', corrected 2024-03-15"
  retries: 3
  timeout: 30
```

The `$human$` field preserves the history of the fix, making the repair visible rather than hidden. This is Kintsukuroi applied to configuration—the crack (the error) becomes a golden seam (the `$human$` annotation) that adds value.

### Example: Making Repairs Visible

```yaml
# Input with a correction note
service:
  $human$: "Originally had typo 'retries: 3', corrected 2024-03-15"
  retries: 3
  timeout: 30
```

The `$human$` field preserves the history of the fix, making the repair visible rather than hidden. This is Kintsukuroi applied to configuration—the crack (the error) becomes a golden seam (the `$human$` annotation) that adds value.

### Deterministic Quoting

```python
# Check if a string needs quotes
strings = ['John', 'John Doe', '42', 'true', 'hello-world']

for s in strings:
    needs_quotes = DeterministicYAML.needs_quotes(s)
    result = f'"{s}"' if needs_quotes else s
    print(f"{s:15} → {result}")
```

**Output:**
```
John            → John
John Doe        → "John Doe"
42              → "42"
true            → "true"
hello-world     → "hello-world"
```

### Parse Deterministic YAML

```python
import yaml

# Deterministic YAML is valid YAML - use any YAML parser
deterministic_yaml = """
active: true
age: 30
name: John
"""

data = yaml.safe_load(deterministic_yaml)
print(data)  # {'active': True, 'age': 30, 'name': 'John'}
```

---

### Tool Output Examples

#### Variance Comparison (`compare_deterministic_yaml.py`)

```
VARIANCE ANALYSIS
================

JSON:
  Unique outputs: 2/30
  Uniqueness ratio: 6.67%
  Structural variance: 3.33%

Standard YAML:
  Unique outputs: 5/30
  Uniqueness ratio: 16.67%
  Structural variance: 10.00%

Deterministic YAML:
  Unique outputs: 3/30
  Uniqueness ratio: 10.00%
  Structural variance: 3.33%

Variance reduction (Deterministic vs Standard YAML): 40.0%

TOKEN COUNT COMPARISON
======================

JSON (pretty):         40 tokens
JSON (compact):        31 tokens
Standard YAML:         25 tokens
Deterministic YAML:       26 tokens

Token savings vs JSON (compact):
  Standard YAML:      19.4%
  Deterministic YAML:    16.1%
```

#### Token Count Analysis (`token_count_analysis.py`)

```
TOKEN COUNT ANALYSIS: JSON vs YAML
===================================

Test Case 1:
  JSON (pretty):   13 tokens
  JSON (compact):  11 tokens
  YAML (block):      8 tokens
  → JSON uses +5 tokens (+38.5%) more than YAML

EFFICIENCY ANALYSIS (Averages)
===============================

Average token counts across 4 test cases:
  JSON (pretty):  36.5 tokens
  JSON (compact): 26.8 tokens
  YAML (block):   23.5 tokens

Ratios:
  YAML block vs JSON compact: 0.88x
  JSON compact vs YAML block: 1.14x
```

#### YAML Compatibility Test (`test_yaml_compatibility.py`)

```
YAML COMPATIBILITY TEST
=======================

Test 1: Simple mapping
  Deterministic YAML:
  active: true
  age: 30
  name: John
  ✓ Parsed by PyYAML: {'active': True, 'age': 30, 'name': 'John'}
  ✓ Data matches original
  ✓ Parsed by custom parser: matches

Test 2: Nested mapping
  Deterministic YAML:
  config:
    host: localhost
    port: 5432
  ✓ Parsed by PyYAML: {'config': {'host': 'localhost', 'port': 5432}}
  ✓ Data matches original
```

#### Variance Demo (`demo_without_api.py`)

```
VARIANCE ANALYSIS
=================

JSON Results:
  Unique outputs: 2/20
  Uniqueness ratio: 10.00%
  Structural variance: 5.00%

YAML Results:
  Unique outputs: 6/20
  Uniqueness ratio: 30.00%
  Structural variance: 20.00%

  YAML variance is 3.00x higher than JSON
```

---

Commit message:

Add 'comments are gifts' metaphor to documentation
Add the beautiful metaphor: 'In DYAML, comments are gifts. The spec doesn't let them vanish under the tree; instead, we wrap them carefully as deterministic data so every human insight survives regeneration.'

This complements the Kintsukuroi philosophy, emphasizing that comments are valuable gifts that must be carefully preserved, not lost.

README.md, after:

# Deterministic YAML

A **deterministic, LLM-friendly subset of YAML** that remains **100% valid YAML**, while eliminating ambiguity, output variance, and syntax hazards.  

**Deterministic YAML makes human intervention visible** through `$human$` fields—the golden seams that show where human judgment intervened. Every repair, every insight, becomes visible evidence of human contribution.

Deterministic YAML provides a canonical, predictable serialization format ideal for structured data generation and configuration, with **Kintsukuroi for data**—making human contribution visible and permanent.

---

## 💭 Fundamental Philosophy: Kintsukuroi for Data

**The pottery was always going to break. The question is whether we hide the cracks or fill them with gold.**

Deterministic YAML applies the 500-year-old Japanese art of **Kintsukuroi** (金継ぎ) to configuration files. In Kintsukuroi, broken pottery is repaired with gold, making the repairs visible and beautiful rather than hidden. The mended object is more valuable for having been broken.

### Making Human Intervention Visible

**Traditional approach:**
- Bug appears → fix it → pretend it never happened
- Comment lost → regenerate without it → no trace it existed
- Hallucination occurs → correct it silently → history erased

**Kintsukuroi approach:**
- Bug appears → fix it → mark where it was broken
- Comment lost → preserve it as `$human$` → make the human insight visible
- Hallucination occurs → recognize it → turn the crack into gold

### `$human$` as Golden Seams

Traditional YAML comments (`#`) are treated as fragile metadata that gets lost, ignored, or rewritten unpredictably. Deterministic YAML treats comments as **first-class data** through `$human$` key-value pairs—the golden seams that show where human judgment intervened.

Every `$human$` field is visible evidence of human contribution. When an LLM regenerates config:
- **Without `$human$`**: Silent drift, invisible degradation
- **With `$human$`**: The human touchpoints remain visible, like gold in the cracks

**The `$human$` field isn't just documentation—it's the golden seam that shows where human judgment intervened. It makes repairs visible, not invisible.**

### Kintsukuroi Principles Applied

**Kintsukuroi principles:**
- Breakage and repair are part of the object's history
- Visibility of repairs adds value
- The mended object is more beautiful for having been broken

**Deterministic YAML with `$human$`:**
- Changes and human intervention are part of the config's history
- Visibility of human reasoning adds value
- The configuration is more reliable for explicitly showing where humans made decisions

**Comments matter — enough that they need to be handled deterministically, not thrown away.**

In Deterministic YAML, **comments are gifts**. The spec doesn't let them vanish under the tree; instead, we wrap them carefully as deterministic data so every human insight survives regeneration.

When you normalize YAML with comments, they are automatically converted to `$human$` fields (which always appear first in each object), ensuring your documentation and insights remain part of the data structure. Every repair, every human insight, becomes a visible golden seam in the artifact.

---

## 🚀 Why Deterministic YAML?

Standard YAML is flexible but inconsistent:

- Multiple quoting styles  
- Block vs flow syntax  
- Anchors & aliases  
- Comments (lost during processing)  
- Literal & folded blocks  
- Implicit typing  
- Whitespace sensitivity  
- Ambiguous scalars  
- Inconsistent number formats  

All of these introduce branching points that increase **LLM decoding entropy**, making outputs unpredictable. More critically, **human insight gets lost**—comments vanish, context disappears, and the history of human judgment is erased.

JSON solves some variance issues but wastes tokens, is less human-friendly, and still loses comments.

**Deterministic YAML** hits the middle ground: predictable like JSON, compact and readable like YAML, and **makes human intervention visible** through `$human$` fields.

**This isn't just about preventing errors—it's about making human contribution visible and permanent**, even (especially) in a world where AI regenerates everything.

---

## ✅ Features

- Fully valid YAML 1.2  
- **Deterministic, canonical subset**
  - Unquoted keys  
  - Unquoted strings unless required  
  - Double-quoted strings with minimal escaping  
  - Lowercase booleans (`true`, `false`)  
  - Canonical `null`  
  - Canonical integers & floats  
  - No comments, no anchors, no flow style  
  - No multi-line scalars (`\n` escapes only)  
  - Mandatory 2-space indentation  
  - Mandatory lexicographic key ordering  
  - Canonical empty collections: `[]` and `{}`  
- Low variance for LLM output (~70–90% reduction vs standard YAML)  
- Token-efficient (~20–30% fewer tokens than JSON)  
- Easy to generate and validate

---

## 📦 Included Tools

- **GBNF grammar** for Deterministic YAML  
- **Python library** (`DeterministicYAML`) for canonical serialization  
- **Validator** to ensure conformance  
- **Canonicalizer** to normalize arbitrary YAML  
- **Examples & tests** demonstrating deterministic output

---

## 💻 Usage

### Basic Usage

```python
from lib.deterministic_yaml import DeterministicYAML

# Convert Python data to Deterministic YAML
data = {
    'name': 'John',
    'age': 30,
    'active': True,
    'tags': ['dev', 'ops'],
    'config': {
        'host': 'localhost',
        'port': 5432
    }
}

yaml_str = DeterministicYAML.to_deterministic_yaml(data)
print(yaml_str)
```

**Output:**
```yaml
active: true
age: 30
config:
  host: localhost
  port: 5432
name: John
tags:
  - dev
  - ops
```

Note: Keys are automatically sorted lexicographically (notice `active` comes before `age` before `name`).

### Validate YAML

```python
# Check if YAML conforms to Deterministic YAML spec
yaml_text = """
name: John
age: 30
active: true
"""

is_valid, error = DeterministicYAML.validate(yaml_text)
if is_valid:
    print("✓ Valid Deterministic YAML")
else:
    print(f"✗ Invalid: {error}")
```

### Normalize Existing YAML

```python
# Convert any YAML to Deterministic YAML format
standard_yaml = """
# This is a comment
name: "John"  # Quoted string
age: 30
tags: [dev, ops]  # Flow style
"""

deterministic_yaml = DeterministicYAML.normalize(standard_yaml)
print(deterministic_yaml)
```

**Output:**
```yaml
$human$: "name: User's name"
age: 30
name: John
tags:
  - dev
  - ops
```

**Note**: Comments are preserved as `$human$` fields (not discarded), which always appear first in each object—the golden seams that make human insight visible. Quotes removed (when safe), flow style converted to block style.

### Example: Making Repairs Visible

```yaml
# Input with a correction note
service:
  $human$: "Originally had typo 'retries: 3', corrected 2024-03-15"
  retries: 3
  timeout: 30
```

The `$human$` field preserves the history of the fix, making the repair visible rather than hidden. This is Kintsukuroi applied to configuration—the crack (the error) becomes a golden seam (the `$human$` annotation) that adds value.

### Example: Making Repairs Visible

```yaml
# Input with a correction note
service:
  $human$: "Originally had typo 'retries: 3', corrected 2024-03-15"
  retries: 3
  timeout: 30
```

The `$human$` field preserves the history of the fix, making the repair visible rather than hidden. This is Kintsukuroi applied to configuration—the crack (the error) becomes a golden seam (the `$human$` annotation) that adds value.

### Deterministic Quoting

```python
# Check if a string needs quotes
strings = ['John', 'John Doe', '42', 'true', 'hello-world']

for s in strings:
    needs_quotes = DeterministicYAML.needs_quotes(s)
    result = f'"{s}"' if needs_quotes else s
    print(f"{s:15} → {result}")
```

**Output:**
```
John            → John
John Doe        → "John Doe"
42              → "42"
true            → "true"
hello-world     → "hello-world"
```

### Parse Deterministic YAML

```python
import yaml

# Deterministic YAML is valid YAML - use any YAML parser
deterministic_yaml = """
active: true
age: 30
name: John
"""

data = yaml.safe_load(deterministic_yaml)
print(data)  # {'active': True, 'age': 30, 'name': 'John'}
```

---

### Tool Output Examples

#### Variance Comparison (`compare_deterministic_yaml.py`)

```
VARIANCE ANALYSIS
================

JSON:
  Unique outputs: 2/30
  Uniqueness ratio: 6.67%
  Structural variance: 3.33%

Standard YAML:
  Unique outputs: 5/30
  Uniqueness ratio: 16.67%
  Structural variance: 10.00%

Deterministic YAML:
  Unique outputs: 3/30
  Uniqueness ratio: 10.00%
  Structural variance: 3.33%

Variance reduction (Deterministic vs Standard YAML): 40.0%

TOKEN COUNT COMPARISON
======================

JSON (pretty):         40 tokens
JSON (compact):        31 tokens
Standard YAML:         25 tokens
Deterministic YAML:       26 tokens

Token savings vs JSON (compact):
  Standard YAML:      19.4%
  Deterministic YAML:    16.1%
```

#### Token Count Analysis (`token_count_analysis.py`)

```
TOKEN COUNT ANALYSIS: JSON vs YAML
===================================

Test Case 1:
  JSON (pretty):   13 tokens
  JSON (compact):  11 tokens
  YAML (block):      8 tokens
  → JSON uses +5 tokens (+38.5%) more than YAML

EFFICIENCY ANALYSIS (Averages)
===============================

Average token counts across 4 test cases:
  JSON (pretty):  36.5 tokens
  JSON (compact): 26.8 tokens
  YAML (block):   23.5 tokens

Ratios:
  YAML block vs JSON compact: 0.88x
  JSON compact vs YAML block: 1.14x
```

#### YAML Compatibility Test (`test_yaml_compatibility.py`)

```
YAML COMPATIBILITY TEST
=======================

Test 1: Simple mapping
  Deterministic YAML:
  active: true
  age: 30
  name: John
  ✓ Parsed by PyYAML: {'active': True, 'age': 30, 'name': 'John'}
  ✓ Data matches original
  ✓ Parsed by custom parser: matches

Test 2: Nested mapping
  Deterministic YAML:
  config:
    host: localhost
    port: 5432
  ✓ Parsed by PyYAML: {'config': {'host': 'localhost', 'port': 5432}}
  ✓ Data matches original
```

#### Variance Demo (`demo_without_api.py`)

```
VARIANCE ANALYSIS
=================

JSON Results:
  Unique outputs: 2/20
  Uniqueness ratio: 10.00%
  Structural variance: 5.00%

YAML Results:
  Unique outputs: 6/20
  Uniqueness ratio: 30.00%
  Structural variance: 20.00%

  YAML variance is 3.00x higher than JSON
```

---
