spec/DETERMINISTIC_YAML_SPEC.md, before:

# Deterministic YAML Specification

A subset of YAML designed to reduce variance while maintaining token efficiency.

## Key Principle

**Deterministic YAML is valid YAML** - any standard YAML parser (PyYAML, yaml-cpp, etc.) can parse it correctly. We don't introduce new syntax; we simply restrict which YAML features are allowed.

## Goals

1. **Reduce Variance**: Eliminate multiple ways to represent the same data
2. **Maintain Token Efficiency**: Keep fewer tokens than JSON
3. **LLM-Friendly**: Make it easier for LLMs to generate consistently
4. **Deterministic**: Same data always produces the same YAML
5. **YAML-Compatible**: Fully parseable by any standard YAML parser

## Specification

### 1. Keys

- **Always unquoted ASCII identifiers**: `[A-Za-z0-9_]+`
- If a key does not match this pattern, the output is invalid
- Always end keys with a colon
- Keys must be sorted lexicographically (Unicode codepoint ordering) at every level

### 2. String Values - Deterministic Quoting Rules

**Rule: Quote a string if ANY of the following apply:**

1. **Contains any YAML indicator**: `: # | > - { } [ ] & * ! % @ `` ` ``
2. **Starts with any indicator character**: `- ? : [ ] { } ! * & # | > ' " % @`
3. **Starts or ends with whitespace**
4. **Is empty** (empty string must be `""`)
5. **Matches any YAML scalar pattern for**:
   - Integers (e.g., `42`, `0`, `-123`)
   - Floats (e.g., `3.14`, `0.5`, `.5`)
   - Booleans (e.g., `true`, `false`, `yes`, `no`, `on`, `off`, `Yes`, `No`, `ON`, `OFF`)
   - Null (e.g., `null`, `~`, empty)
   - Special values (e.g., `.nan`, `.inf`, `+.inf`, `-.inf`)
6. **Contains a newline** (forces quoting + `\n` escape)
7. **Contains numeric-looking patterns**:
   - Leading zeros (e.g., `01`, `007`)
   - Underscores (e.g., `1_000`)
   - Plus signs (e.g., `+42`, `+.5`)
   - Octal/hex notation (e.g., `0o10`, `0xFF`)
   - Timestamps (e.g., `2023-02-01`)
   - Floats without leading digits (e.g., `.5`)

**Unquoted strings are allowed only if they match**: `[A-Za-z0-9_]+`

### 3. Escape Policy (Mandatory)

When quoting, use double quotes and escape only:

- `\` → `\\`
- `"` → `\"`
- newline → `\n`
- tab → `\t`
- control chars → `\xNN` (where NN is hex)

**No other escapes allowed.** This gives you a deterministic minimal escape set.

### 4. Numeric Canonicalization

**Rule: One canonical number form**

**Integers:**
- Canonical base-10, no leading zeros
- Examples: `0`, `42`, `12345`, `-123`
- No `+` sign
- No underscores
- If a number can't be represented in this format → quote it and treat as string

**Floats:**
- Canonical decimal, at least one digit before and after the decimal point
- Examples: `3.14`, `0.5`, `10.0`
- No exponent notation (no `1e10`, `1E-5`)
- No `+` sign
- No underscores
- No trailing decimal point (`1.` is illegal, use `1.0`)
- If a number can't be represented in this format without precision loss → quote it and treat as string

This is identical to how canonical JSON and canonical CBOR handle numbers: strict and boring.

### 5. Booleans and Null

- **Boolean values**: `true` or `false` (lowercase only)
- **Null**: `null` only (not `~` or empty)
- Bare keys without values are never allowed

### 6. Lists

- **Always block style** with `- item`
- Never inline lists `[item1, item2]`
- Indentation must be exactly 2 spaces
- **Empty list**: Use flow style `[]` (canonical empty collection)

Example:
```yaml
tags:
  - dev
  - ops
```

Empty list:
```yaml
tags: []
```

### 7. Objects/Mappings

- **Always block style** with indentation
- Never flow style `{key: value}`
- 2-space indentation for all nested mappings
- Keys must be sorted lexicographically (Unicode codepoint ordering)
- **Empty mapping**: Use flow style `{}` (canonical empty collection)

Example:
```yaml
config:
  host: localhost
  port: 5432
```

Empty mapping:
```yaml
config: {}
```

### 8. Indentation Rules (Minimal and Strict)

- **Root level**: Column 1 only (no leading spaces)
- **Every nested structure**: +2 spaces exactly
- **No tabs ever**
- **No trailing spaces**
- **No blank lines inside structures**
- This removes whitespace-based ambiguity entirely (YAML is notoriously whitespace-sensitive)

### 9. Multi-line Strings

- **Forbidden**
- If needed, use `\n` inside a double-quoted string
- Example: `description: "Line 1\nLine 2"` not:
  ```yaml
  description: |
    Line 1
    Line 2
  ```

### 10. Comments - Explicitly Forbidden

**Formal Rule: Comments are strictly forbidden in Deterministic YAML.**

#### Prohibition

- **YAML comment syntax (`#`) is not allowed anywhere in Deterministic YAML**
- This includes:
  - Line comments: `# This is a comment`
  - Inline comments: `key: value  # comment`
  - Block comments: `# Comment block`
- **Rationale**: Comments introduce variance - the same logical data can have different comments, breaking determinism

#### Sanctioned Alternative: `_comment` Fields

**When documentation is needed, use a `_comment` key with a string value:**

```yaml
# INVALID - Comments are forbidden
name: John
# age: 30  # This is also invalid

# VALID - Use _comment field instead
_comment: "User profile configuration"
name: John
age: 30
```

**Rules for `_comment` fields:**
- Key must be exactly `_comment` (underscore prefix indicates metadata)
- Value must be a quoted string (since it contains spaces/punctuation)
- `_comment` fields are treated as regular key-value pairs
- Multiple `_comment` fields are allowed (though not recommended)
- `_comment` fields are sorted lexicographically like other keys

**Example with nested comments:**
```yaml
_comment: "Main configuration"
config:
  _comment: "Database settings"
  host: localhost
  port: 5432
```

**Benefits of `_comment` fields:**
- Deterministic: Same data always produces same YAML
- Parseable: Comments are part of the data structure
- Sortable: Comments are included in lexicographic key sorting
- Portable: Comments survive round-trip through any YAML parser
- LLM-friendly: Clear, unambiguous syntax

**Note**: The `_comment` convention is a data-level solution, not a syntax-level feature. It maintains determinism while allowing documentation.

### 11. Anchors and Aliases

- **Forbidden**
- `&anchor` and `*alias` syntax is not permitted
- Reduces complexity and variance

### 12. Document Markers

- **Forbidden**
- No `---` (document start) or `...` (document end)
- Single document only

### 13. Key Ordering (Mandatory)

- **Mappings must be lexicographically sorted by key**, using Unicode codepoint ordering
- This means:
  - Consistent normalization for all data
  - Diffable output
  - Identical materialization across runs, platforms, languages, and models
- This is the single biggest win for LLM determinism besides quoting rules

### 14. Encoding

- **UTF-8 only**
- **No BOM**
- **Normalized newlines** (`\n` only, not `\r\n` or `\r`)
- This prevents cross-platform divergence

## Ban Ambiguous Scalars Explicitly

Some YAML interpretations are "legal but cursed" for LLMs. **Rule: Disallow implicitly typed scalars except:**

- lowercase `true`
- lowercase `false`
- `null`

**Everything else ambiguous must be quoted.**

Examples that must be quoted:
- `Yes`, `No`, `ON`, `OFF`
- `.nan`, `.inf`, `+.inf`, `-.inf`
- Numeric-looking things: `01`, `1_000`, `+.5`
- Octal/hex notations: `0o10`, `0xFF`
- Timestamps: `2023-02-01`
- Floats without leading digits: `.5`
- Any string starting with indicator characters

This removes YAML's type lottery.

## Comparison with Standard YAML

### Standard YAML (High Variance)

The same data can be represented in many ways:

```yaml
# Variant 1: Unquoted
name: John
age: 30

# Variant 2: Quoted
name: "John"
age: 30

# Variant 3: Single quotes
name: 'John'
age: 30

# Variant 4: Flow style
{name: John, age: 30}

# Variant 5: With comments
name: John  # User name
age: 30
```

**Result**: 5+ different valid representations of the same data.

### Deterministic YAML (Low Variance)

The same data has only one representation:

```yaml
age: 30
name: John
```

**Result**: 1 canonical representation (keys sorted, deterministic quoting).

## Comparison with JSON

### Token Count

**JSON:**
```json
{"name": "John", "age": 30, "active": true}
```
~11 tokens (with quotes and braces)

**Deterministic YAML:**
```yaml
active: true
age: 30
name: John
```
~8 tokens (no quotes, no braces, keys sorted)

**Savings**: ~27% fewer tokens than JSON

### Variance

**JSON**: Very low variance (only formatting differences)
- Pretty: `{"name": "John"}`
- Compact: `{"name":"John"}`
- Normalized: Same structure

**Deterministic YAML**: Low variance (only key ordering differences, but keys are sorted)
- Always unquoted strings (when allowed)
- Always block style
- Always 2-space indentation
- No comments, no flow style
- Keys always sorted

**Standard YAML**: High variance (many representations)
- Multiple quote styles
- Flow vs block
- Comments
- Anchors/aliases

## Benefits

### 1. Reduced Variance

- **Standard YAML**: 40-80% uniqueness across runs
- **Deterministic YAML**: 0-5% uniqueness (only if data structure differs)
- **Variance reduction**: ~95-100%

### 2. Token Efficiency

- **JSON**: ~30 tokens (compact)
- **Deterministic YAML**: ~23 tokens
- **Savings**: ~23% fewer tokens

### 3. LLM-Friendly

- Fewer choices = more consistent output
- Clear rules = easier to learn
- Predictable structure = lower entropy
- Deterministic quoting = no ambiguity

### 4. Deterministic

- Same data → same YAML (with sorted keys)
- Easier to compare/diff
- Easier to validate
- Identical across platforms, languages, and models

## Trade-offs

### What We Lose

1. **Comments**: Can't add inline documentation
   - **Solution**: Use `_comment` or `_description` fields

2. **Flow Style**: Can't use compact `{key: value}` syntax (except empty collections)
   - **Solution**: Always use block style (more readable anyway)

3. **Multi-line Strings**: Can't use literal/folded blocks
   - **Solution**: Use `\n` escape sequences

4. **Flexibility**: Can't use all YAML features
   - **Solution**: This is intentional - we want less flexibility

### What We Gain

1. **Consistency**: Same data always produces same output
2. **Predictability**: LLMs generate more consistent outputs
3. **Lower Variance**: 95-100% reduction in output variance
4. **Token Efficiency**: Still 20-30% fewer tokens than JSON
5. **Simplicity**: Easier to parse, validate, and generate
6. **Determinism**: Identical output across all platforms and implementations

## Implementation

See `deterministic_yaml.py` for:
- `to_deterministic_yaml()`: Convert Python data to deterministic YAML
- `validate()`: Check if YAML conforms to deterministic syntax
- `normalize()`: Convert any YAML to deterministic format

See `deterministic_yaml_parser.py` for:
- Custom parser implementation (optional - standard YAML parsers work too)

## YAML Compatibility

**Deterministic YAML is fully compatible with standard YAML parsers.**

You can use any YAML parser to read Deterministic YAML:

```python
import yaml

# Deterministic YAML can be parsed by PyYAML
deterministic_yaml = """
name: John
age: 30
active: true
"""

data = yaml.safe_load(deterministic_yaml)  # Works perfectly!
```

This means:
- ✅ No special parser required
- ✅ Works with existing YAML tooling
- ✅ Can be used in any YAML-based system
- ✅ Backward compatible with YAML ecosystem

## Usage Example

```python
from deterministic_yaml import DeterministicYAML

data = {
    'name': 'John',
    'age': 30,
    'active': True
}

# Generate deterministic YAML
yaml_str = DeterministicYAML.to_deterministic_yaml(data)
# Result: Always the same format (keys sorted, deterministic)

# Validate
is_valid, error = DeterministicYAML.validate(yaml_str)

# Normalize existing YAML
normalized = DeterministicYAML.normalize(existing_yaml)
```

## Best Practices

1. **Sort keys alphabetically** for maximum determinism (mandatory)
2. **Use `_comment` fields** instead of comments
3. **Validate output** to ensure it conforms to deterministic syntax
4. **Normalize existing YAML** before comparing or processing
5. **Use deterministic YAML for LLM generation** to reduce variance
6. **Use UTF-8 encoding** with `\n` line endings only

## Conclusion

Deterministic YAML provides:
- **95-100% variance reduction** vs standard YAML
- **20-30% token savings** vs JSON
- **Deterministic output** (same data → same YAML)
- **LLM-friendly** (easier to generate consistently)
- **YAML-compatible** (works with any YAML parser)

It's the sweet spot: more efficient than JSON, more consistent than standard YAML, and fully deterministic.

Commit message:

Emphasize that comments are preserved as data, not discarded
Update documentation to clarify that Deterministic YAML treats comments as first-class data that must be preserved, not metadata that can be lost. Comments are human insight that survives round-trips, normalization, and regeneration.

spec/DETERMINISTIC_YAML_SPEC.md, after:

# Deterministic YAML Specification

A subset of YAML designed to reduce variance while maintaining token efficiency.

## Key Principle

**Deterministic YAML is valid YAML** - any standard YAML parser (PyYAML, yaml-cpp, etc.) can parse it correctly. We don't introduce new syntax; we simply restrict which YAML features are allowed.

## Goals

1. **Reduce Variance**: Eliminate multiple ways to represent the same data
2. **Maintain Token Efficiency**: Keep fewer tokens than JSON
3. **LLM-Friendly**: Make it easier for LLMs to generate consistently
4. **Deterministic**: Same data always produces the same YAML
5. **YAML-Compatible**: Fully parseable by any standard YAML parser

## Specification

### 1. Keys

- **Always unquoted ASCII identifiers**: `[A-Za-z0-9_]+`
- If a key does not match this pattern, the output is invalid
- Always end keys with a colon
- Keys must be sorted lexicographically (Unicode codepoint ordering) at every level

### 2. String Values - Deterministic Quoting Rules

**Rule: Quote a string if ANY of the following apply:**

1. **Contains any YAML indicator**: `: # | > - { } [ ] & * ! % @ `` ` ``
2. **Starts with any indicator character**: `- ? : [ ] { } ! * & # | > ' " % @`
3. **Starts or ends with whitespace**
4. **Is empty** (empty string must be `""`)
5. **Matches any YAML scalar pattern for**:
   - Integers (e.g., `42`, `0`, `-123`)
   - Floats (e.g., `3.14`, `0.5`, `.5`)
   - Booleans (e.g., `true`, `false`, `yes`, `no`, `on`, `off`, `Yes`, `No`, `ON`, `OFF`)
   - Null (e.g., `null`, `~`, empty)
   - Special values (e.g., `.nan`, `.inf`, `+.inf`, `-.inf`)
6. **Contains a newline** (forces quoting + `\n` escape)
7. **Contains numeric-looking patterns**:
   - Leading zeros (e.g., `01`, `007`)
   - Underscores (e.g., `1_000`)
   - Plus signs (e.g., `+42`, `+.5`)
   - Octal/hex notation (e.g., `0o10`, `0xFF`)
   - Timestamps (e.g., `2023-02-01`)
   - Floats without leading digits (e.g., `.5`)

**Unquoted strings are allowed only if they match**: `[A-Za-z0-9_]+`

### 3. Escape Policy (Mandatory)

When quoting, use double quotes and escape only:

- `\` → `\\`
- `"` → `\"`
- newline → `\n`
- tab → `\t`
- control chars → `\xNN` (where NN is hex)

**No other escapes allowed.** This gives you a deterministic minimal escape set.

### 4. Numeric Canonicalization

**Rule: One canonical number form**

**Integers:**
- Canonical base-10, no leading zeros
- Examples: `0`, `42`, `12345`, `-123`
- No `+` sign
- No underscores
- If a number can't be represented in this format → quote it and treat as string

**Floats:**
- Canonical decimal, at least one digit before and after the decimal point
- Examples: `3.14`, `0.5`, `10.0`
- No exponent notation (no `1e10`, `1E-5`)
- No `+` sign
- No underscores
- No trailing decimal point (`1.` is illegal, use `1.0`)
- If a number can't be represented in this format without precision loss → quote it and treat as string

This is identical to how canonical JSON and canonical CBOR handle numbers: strict and boring.

### 5. Booleans and Null

- **Boolean values**: `true` or `false` (lowercase only)
- **Null**: `null` only (not `~` or empty)
- Bare keys without values are never allowed

### 6. Lists

- **Always block style** with `- item`
- Never inline lists `[item1, item2]`
- Indentation must be exactly 2 spaces
- **Empty list**: Use flow style `[]` (canonical empty collection)

Example:
```yaml
tags:
  - dev
  - ops
```

Empty list:
```yaml
tags: []
```

### 7. Objects/Mappings

- **Always block style** with indentation
- Never flow style `{key: value}`
- 2-space indentation for all nested mappings
- Keys must be sorted lexicographically (Unicode codepoint ordering)
- **Empty mapping**: Use flow style `{}` (canonical empty collection)

Example:
```yaml
config:
  host: localhost
  port: 5432
```

Empty mapping:
```yaml
config: {}
```

### 8. Indentation Rules (Minimal and Strict)

- **Root level**: Column 1 only (no leading spaces)
- **Every nested structure**: +2 spaces exactly
- **No tabs ever**
- **No trailing spaces**
- **No blank lines inside structures**
- This removes whitespace-based ambiguity entirely (YAML is notoriously whitespace-sensitive)

### 9. Multi-line Strings

- **Forbidden**
- If needed, use `\n` inside a double-quoted string
- Example: `description: "Line 1\nLine 2"` not:
  ```yaml
  description: |
    Line 1
    Line 2
  ```

### 10. Comments - Explicitly Forbidden

**Formal Rule: Comments are strictly forbidden in Deterministic YAML.**

#### Philosophy: Comments as Data, Not Metadata

**Comments are human insight that must be preserved, not discarded.** Traditional YAML comments (`#`) are treated as metadata that gets lost, ignored, or rewritten unpredictably during:
- Round-trip parsing
- Normalization
- Regeneration
- Data transformation

**Deterministic YAML treats comments as first-class data** — as key-value pairs that survive all operations. This ensures human insight doesn't vanish.

#### Prohibition

- **YAML comment syntax (`#`) is not allowed anywhere in Deterministic YAML**
- This includes:
  - Line comments: `# This is a comment`
  - Inline comments: `key: value  # comment`
  - Block comments: `# Comment block`
- **Rationale**: Comments introduce variance - the same logical data can have different comments, breaking determinism. More importantly, YAML comments are fragile metadata that gets lost during processing.

#### Sanctioned Alternative: `_comment` Fields

**Comments matter — enough that they need to be handled deterministically, not thrown away.** Use a `_comment` key with a string value to preserve human insight as data:

```yaml
# INVALID - Comments are forbidden
name: John
# age: 30  # This is also invalid

# VALID - Use _comment field instead
_comment: "User profile configuration"
name: John
age: 30
```

**Rules for `_comment` fields:**
- Key must be exactly `_comment` (underscore prefix indicates metadata)
- Value must be a quoted string (since it contains spaces/punctuation)
- `_comment` fields are treated as regular key-value pairs
- Multiple `_comment` fields are allowed (though not recommended)
- `_comment` fields are sorted lexicographically like other keys

**Example with nested comments:**
```yaml
_comment: "Main configuration"
config:
  _comment: "Database settings"
  host: localhost
  port: 5432
```

**Benefits of `_comment` fields:**
- **Preserved as data**: Comments are part of the data structure, not metadata that can be lost
- **Deterministic**: Same data always produces same YAML (comments included)
- **Round-trip safe**: Comments survive regeneration, normalization, and any YAML parser
- **Sortable**: Comments are included in lexicographic key sorting
- **LLM-friendly**: Clear, unambiguous syntax for generating and preserving documentation
- **Human insight preserved**: The human touch of comments is maintained, not discarded

**Note**: The `_comment` convention is a data-level solution, not a syntax-level feature. It maintains determinism while allowing documentation.

### 11. Anchors and Aliases

- **Forbidden**
- `&anchor` and `*alias` syntax is not permitted
- Reduces complexity and variance

### 12. Document Markers

- **Forbidden**
- No `---` (document start) or `...` (document end)
- Single document only

### 13. Key Ordering (Mandatory)

- **Mappings must be lexicographically sorted by key**, using Unicode codepoint ordering
- This means:
  - Consistent normalization for all data
  - Diffable output
  - Identical materialization across runs, platforms, languages, and models
- This is the single biggest win for LLM determinism besides quoting rules

### 14. Encoding

- **UTF-8 only**
- **No BOM**
- **Normalized newlines** (`\n` only, not `\r\n` or `\r`)
- This prevents cross-platform divergence

## Ban Ambiguous Scalars Explicitly

Some YAML interpretations are "legal but cursed" for LLMs. **Rule: Disallow implicitly typed scalars except:**

- lowercase `true`
- lowercase `false`
- `null`

**Everything else ambiguous must be quoted.**

Examples that must be quoted:
- `Yes`, `No`, `ON`, `OFF`
- `.nan`, `.inf`, `+.inf`, `-.inf`
- Numeric-looking things: `01`, `1_000`, `+.5`
- Octal/hex notations: `0o10`, `0xFF`
- Timestamps: `2023-02-01`
- Floats without leading digits: `.5`
- Any string starting with indicator characters

This removes YAML's type lottery.

## Comparison with Standard YAML

### Standard YAML (High Variance)

The same data can be represented in many ways:

```yaml
# Variant 1: Unquoted
name: John
age: 30

# Variant 2: Quoted
name: "John"
age: 30

# Variant 3: Single quotes
name: 'John'
age: 30

# Variant 4: Flow style
{name: John, age: 30}

# Variant 5: With comments
name: John  # User name
age: 30
```

**Result**: 5+ different valid representations of the same data.

### Deterministic YAML (Low Variance)

The same data has only one representation:

```yaml
age: 30
name: John
```

**Result**: 1 canonical representation (keys sorted, deterministic quoting).

## Comparison with JSON

### Token Count

**JSON:**
```json
{"name": "John", "age": 30, "active": true}
```
~11 tokens (with quotes and braces)

**Deterministic YAML:**
```yaml
active: true
age: 30
name: John
```
~8 tokens (no quotes, no braces, keys sorted)

**Savings**: ~27% fewer tokens than JSON

### Variance

**JSON**: Very low variance (only formatting differences)
- Pretty: `{"name": "John"}`
- Compact: `{"name":"John"}`
- Normalized: Same structure

**Deterministic YAML**: Low variance (only key ordering differences, but keys are sorted)
- Always unquoted strings (when allowed)
- Always block style
- Always 2-space indentation
- No comments, no flow style
- Keys always sorted

**Standard YAML**: High variance (many representations)
- Multiple quote styles
- Flow vs block
- Comments
- Anchors/aliases

## Benefits

### 1. Reduced Variance

- **Standard YAML**: 40-80% uniqueness across runs
- **Deterministic YAML**: 0-5% uniqueness (only if data structure differs)
- **Variance reduction**: ~95-100%

### 2. Token Efficiency

- **JSON**: ~30 tokens (compact)
- **Deterministic YAML**: ~23 tokens
- **Savings**: ~23% fewer tokens

### 3. LLM-Friendly

- Fewer choices = more consistent output
- Clear rules = easier to learn
- Predictable structure = lower entropy
- Deterministic quoting = no ambiguity

### 4. Deterministic

- Same data → same YAML (with sorted keys)
- Easier to compare/diff
- Easier to validate
- Identical across platforms, languages, and models

## Trade-offs

### What We Lose

1. **Comments**: Can't add inline documentation
   - **Solution**: Use `_comment` or `_description` fields

2. **Flow Style**: Can't use compact `{key: value}` syntax (except empty collections)
   - **Solution**: Always use block style (more readable anyway)

3. **Multi-line Strings**: Can't use literal/folded blocks
   - **Solution**: Use `\n` escape sequences

4. **Flexibility**: Can't use all YAML features
   - **Solution**: This is intentional - we want less flexibility

### What We Gain

1. **Consistency**: Same data always produces same output
2. **Predictability**: LLMs generate more consistent outputs
3. **Lower Variance**: 95-100% reduction in output variance
4. **Token Efficiency**: Still 20-30% fewer tokens than JSON
5. **Simplicity**: Easier to parse, validate, and generate
6. **Determinism**: Identical output across all platforms and implementations

## Implementation

See `deterministic_yaml.py` for:
- `to_deterministic_yaml()`: Convert Python data to deterministic YAML
- `validate()`: Check if YAML conforms to deterministic syntax
- `normalize()`: Convert any YAML to deterministic format

See `deterministic_yaml_parser.py` for:
- Custom parser implementation (optional - standard YAML parsers work too)

## YAML Compatibility

**Deterministic YAML is fully compatible with standard YAML parsers.**

You can use any YAML parser to read Deterministic YAML:

```python
import yaml

# Deterministic YAML can be parsed by PyYAML
deterministic_yaml = """
name: John
age: 30
active: true
"""

data = yaml.safe_load(deterministic_yaml)  # Works perfectly!
```

This means:
- ✅ No special parser required
- ✅ Works with existing YAML tooling
- ✅ Can be used in any YAML-based system
- ✅ Backward compatible with YAML ecosystem

## Usage Example

```python
from deterministic_yaml import DeterministicYAML

data = {
    'name': 'John',
    'age': 30,
    'active': True
}

# Generate deterministic YAML
yaml_str = DeterministicYAML.to_deterministic_yaml(data)
# Result: Always the same format (keys sorted, deterministic)

# Validate
is_valid, error = DeterministicYAML.validate(yaml_str)

# Normalize existing YAML
normalized = DeterministicYAML.normalize(existing_yaml)
```

## Best Practices

1. **Sort keys alphabetically** for maximum determinism (mandatory)
2. **Use `_comment` fields** instead of comments
3. **Validate output** to ensure it conforms to deterministic syntax
4. **Normalize existing YAML** before comparing or processing
5. **Use deterministic YAML for LLM generation** to reduce variance
6. **Use UTF-8 encoding** with `\n` line endings only

## Conclusion

Deterministic YAML provides:
- **95-100% variance reduction** vs standard YAML
- **20-30% token savings** vs JSON
- **Deterministic output** (same data → same YAML)
- **LLM-friendly** (easier to generate consistently)
- **YAML-compatible** (works with any YAML parser)

It's the sweet spot: more efficient than JSON, more consistent than standard YAML, and fully deterministic.
